                             FIRST SECTION



                        CASE OF L.D. v. POLAND

                         (Application no. 12119/14)




                                  JUDGMENT


Art 8 • Positive obligations • Family life • Domestic authorities’ failure to
ensure the effective enforcement of the applicant’s custody of and contact
with her son after his father refused to return him • Proceedings marked by a
lack of diligence and long and repeated delays with significant consequences
for the family situation • Shortcomings in decision-making process and the
enforcement of court orders contributed to the complete breakdown of the
applicant’s relationship with her son • Failure to make adequate and effective
efforts to protect her rights

                 Prepared by the Registry. Does not bind the Court.


                                STRASBOURG

                               13 February 2025


                                    FINAL

                                  13/05/2025
     This judgment has become final under Article 44 § 2 of the Convention.
                    It may be subject to editorial revision.
                          L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


   In the case of L.D. v. Poland,
   The European Court of Human Rights (First Section), sitting as a Chamber
composed of:
      Ivana Jelić, President,
      Erik Wennerström,
      Alena Poláčková,
      Frédéric Krenc,
      Alain Chablais,
      Artūrs Kučs,
      Anna Adamska-Gallant, judges,
and Ilse Freiwirth, Section Registrar,
   Having regard to:
   the application (no. 12119/14) against the Republic of Poland lodged with
the Court under Article 34 of the Convention for the Protection of Human
Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (“the Convention”) by a Polish national,
Ms L.D. (“the applicant”), on 3 February 2014;
   the decision to give notice to the Polish Government (“the Government”)
of the application concerning Article 8 of the Convention;
   the decision not to have the applicant’s name disclosed;
   the parties’ observations;
   Having deliberated in private on 21 January 2025,
   Delivers the following judgment, which was adopted on that date:

INTRODUCTION
  1. The case concerns the State’s positive obligations under Article 8 of the
Convention regarding the applicant’s custody of and contact with her child.

THE FACTS
   2. The applicant was born in 1971 and lives in Sieradz. The applicant was
represented by Ms M. Gąsiorowska, a lawyer practising in Warsaw.
   3. The    Government       were    represented      by    their    Agent,
Ms A. Kozińska-Makowska, of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
   4. The facts of the case may be summarised as follows.

I. BACKGROUND

   5. B. is a child born in 2006 to the applicant (the mother) and to P. (the
father), with whom the applicant was in a relationship until January 2011.
Initially, B. was living with the applicant and his half-brother. Both parents
retained full parental custody of the child and the father exercised contact
rights in accordance with a judicial decision.




                                      1
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


   6. On 6 March 2011 P. did not return the child to the applicant. Several
attempts immediately undertaken by the applicant to retrieve B. failed. The
police refused assistance on the grounds that the child’s place of residence
with the mother had not been formally established by a court order.
   7. On 8 March 2011 the applicant applied to the Sieradz District Court
(Sąd Rejonowy, “the SDC”) seeking to have the child returned to her.

II. COURT PROCEEDINGS LEADING UP TO THE CHILD’S RETURN
    ORDER OF 23 MAY 2012

 A. First part of proceedings regarding child custody

   1. Main proceedings
   8. On 11 March 2011 the SDC opened, proprio motu, proceedings to limit
the parental custody of both parents given the conflict between them.
   9. On 15 March 2011 the applicant lodged an application seeking to
restrict P.’s custody and to establish the child’s place of residence as being
with her.
   10. On 25 March 2011 the SDC joined that application to the main
proceedings.
   11. On 20 June 2011 the SDC ordered that an expert report regarding B.’s
psychological state and the parties’ parental skills be drawn up by the Family
Consultation Centre (Rodzinny Ośrodek Diagnostyczno-Konsultacyjny, “the
RODK”).
   12. On 11 October 2011 the RODK drew up its report, based, among other
things, on examinations conducted on 13 and 29 September 2011. The RODK
included findings regarding B., his father, P., and the applicant. It stated that
B. was emotionally unstable and heavily dependent on his paternal family.
He had a close and positive bond with his father and also showed closeness
and trust towards his mother. It found that P. was egocentric, authoritarian,
overconfident, condescending and manipulative, not abiding by social or
legal norms, but driven by his own moral code. He was not in tune with his
child’s needs and, towards his child, P. was impatient, chaotic and overly
commanding. He was belittling and competitive towards the child’s mother.
He had agreed to the meetings between the child and the mother only if they
took place on his terms and under his supervision. P. had expressly stated
that, if his conditions were not met, he would not abide by any court orders,
even if the police arrived at his house. It was suspected that P. was heavily
addicted to alcohol. The RODK stated that the applicant was cooperative and
caring. She was emotionally dependent on others and, at times, she could be
overemotional, helpless and slightly possessive. In the past, she had
threatened to kill herself and her children. The applicant had adapted and
responded to B.’s needs, and despite P.’s disturbing actions, she had
stimulated and accompanied the child. The RODK concluded that B. had




                                        2
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


shown a need to be close with both parents, although he was dependent on
emotional approval from his paternal family. The parental skills of both
parents were diminished by their inability to separate their own conflict from
their relationship with the child. The report stated that the child should be in
the custody of the applicant, since she was, nevertheless, better suited to
respond to the boy’s needs and that P. should have regular contact with the
child.
   13. On 23 February 2012 the SDC delivered a ruling in which it
authorised P. to exercise custody of B. It also ordered the parents to undergo
therapy to improve their parental skills and appointed a guardian to monitor
the parents’ compliance with the ruling. The domestic court observed that,
based on unspecified witness testimony and police reports, as well as on a
medical certificate, it could not adhere to the RODK’s conclusions.
Removing B. from the paternal family environment would not be in his best
interests. It could not be said that P. was an alcoholic, and B. felt safe in his
father’s house and any harmful behaviour would cease after P. and the
applicant underwent therapy, as ordered by the court.
   14. On 12 April 2012 the applicant appealed against that ruling, among
other things, on the grounds that P. was hindering her contact with B. and
manipulating the child.
   15. On 8 May 2012 the President of the Sieradz Regional Court (Sąd
Okręgowy, the “SRC”) replied to the applicant’s request to expedite the
proceedings. It was considered that, despite the statutory time-limits having
been exceeded, there had been no unreasonable delays in the applicant’s case.
   16. On 23 May 2012 the SRC granted the applicant’s appeal and changed
the ruling of the SDC of 23 February 2012. The court granted full custody of
B. to the applicant. The SRC also ordered the court-appointed guardian to
supervise the applicant. The court reasoned that the SDC had not had any
basis to discredit the RODK’s expert report, which was reliable,
comprehensive and objective. Moreover, in finding that B.’s removal from
his paternal residence would not be in the child’s best interests, the lower
court had contradicted the experts and itself, given that, in its decision of
11 March 2011 (see paragraph 18 below), it had found that B. had not been
in danger while living with his mother. The SRC ordered P. to hand B. over
to the applicant. The ruling became immediately final, and on 24 May 2012
the SRC issued a formal instrument of enforcement.

   2. Court decisions regarding the child’s place of residence
   17. Meanwhile, on 4 March 2011 P. filed an application for an interim
measure, seeking to have B.’s residence established at his own address.
   18. On 11 March 2011 the SDC dismissed it. The court relied on the
community interview conducted by a court-appointed officer and held that
B.’s best interests had not been jeopardised while being in the applicant’s
custody.




                                        3
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


   19. P. lodged an interlocutory appeal against that ruling, which was
dismissed by the SRC on 27 April 2011.
   20. Meanwhile, on 15 or 16 March 2011, the applicant requested a court
order regarding the child’s place of residence (see paragraph 9 above).
   21. On 25 March 2011 the SDC dismissed her application and, acting
proprio motu, issued a different order, stating that a court-appointed guardian
should supervise the father’s custody of B. The court held that B.’s best
interests had not been jeopardised while in the custody of his father. It also
declared that since both parents enjoyed full parental custody, the child could
live with either one of them. It observed that B.’s permanent place of
residence would be decided in the course of the main proceedings.
   22. On 30 May 2011 the applicant applied to have the above order
changed so that B.’s temporary place of residence would be with her.
   23. On 20 June 2011 the SDC dismissed that application.
   24. On 27 June 2011 the applicant appealed against that decision.
   25. On 1 August 2011 the SRC dismissed that appeal.

   3. Court decision regarding contact rights
   26. On 25 March and 15 April 2011 the applicant filed an application,
seeking an order regarding her contact arrangements.
   27. On 26 April 2011 the SDC dismissed the request of 15 April. The
court held that the applicant had failed to show any legal interest in obtaining
an interim order in that regard. The court reasoned that refraining from issuing
the order regulating the applicant’s contact rights would not render the
enforcement of the future decision regarding custody impossible or seriously
difficult within the meaning of Article 7301 § 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure
(see paragraph 101 below). The court suggested that the applicant should seek
contact arrangements in a separate set of proceedings.

 B. The applicant’s contact with the child and related proceedings

   1. Applicant’s contact with B. in the period when her contact rights were
      not established by any court order
    28. Between 2 April and 29 August 2011, the applicant filed several
letters with the SDC, informing the court that P. was hindering her contact
with her son. In particular, she made the following submissions: (i) between
4 March and 17 June 2011 she had seen B. four times at his kindergarten, and
four or five times at P.’s house – in his and his family’s presence – where P.
and his family had shouted insults and swear words at her and pushed a person
accompanying her out of the garden; (ii) between 17 June and 29 August 2011
(including on B.’s birthday) she had not seen B. or had any information about
him; (iii) the applicant’s telephone calls and letters to P., in which she was
informing him of dates when she wished to meet with her child or to take him




                                       4
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


on holiday, had gone unanswered; and (iv) the applicant had gone to P.’s
house dozens of times and had stood there for hours, waiting for or calling
her son.

   2. Applicant’s contact with B. in the period when her contact rights were
      established by a court order
    29. Regarding the period when contact rights were set out in the court
orders of 21 October 2011 and 7 November 2011 (paragraphs 42 and 43
below), the applicant made the following submissions, firstly, to the SDC and
then, also, to the guardian appointed by the court in the custody decision of
23 February 2012.
    30. According to the applicant’s letter of 29 December 2011, in the first
two months following the order, P. had effectively hindered the applicant’s
contact rights. In particular, the applicant could only meet with B. six out of
nine times on Wednesdays, and two out of four times at weekends. She did
not see the child over Christmas. The meetings had only taken place when the
applicant had picked up the child from kindergarten; when the applicant had
tried to pick up the child from P.’s house, she had been told either that B. had
been ill, or that the child had refused to go with her. The applicant, giving
various examples, submitted that P. had manipulated the child and made him
feel guilty about meeting with her.
    31. In her letter of 7 March 2012, the applicant conveyed her suspicion
that P. had been pressuring B. to refuse the meetings and turning him against
her. She submitted that seven meetings (between 25 January and 29 February
2012) had not taken place and described several situations when P. had either
picked up the child from the kindergarten on the applicant’s day, had told her
that the child had been ill (without a medical certificate or with a certificate
indicating a future date), or had taken B. out of town. She also recounted how
P. had pressured B. into refusing to go with his mother and how he had
provoked an argument and ended up not allowing her to have her meeting
with the child.
    32. In her letter of 23 April 2012 the applicant submitted that ten meetings
(between 2 March and 9 April 2012) had not taken place, either because B.
had refused to go with her when he had seen P. or his relatives waiting for
him in front of the kindergarten, or because he had not been at the
kindergarten in the first place. She also claimed that P. had told B. that if he
went with his mother, she would not return him. The applicant submitted that
she had been going to the kindergarten on alternative days in order to spend
time with B. there.




                                       5
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


   3. Proceedings concerning contact rights
   33. On 5 May 2011 the applicant lodged an application with the SDC
seeking contact rights for her and B.’s grandmother. She also filed an
application for an interim order in that matter.
   34. On 6 May 2011 the SDC declared that, given the child’s actual place
of residence, it lacked jurisdiction ratione loci and transmitted the case to the
Zduńska Wola District Court (the “ZWDC”).
   35. On 30 May 2011 the applicant asked the SDC to expedite the
proceedings.
   36. On 6 June 2011 the ZWDC dismissed the applicant’s request for an
interim order, essentially considering that the SDC was better placed to rule
on the issue. On 7 June 2011 the ZWDC asked the SRC for the case be
reassigned to the SDC.
   37. On 14 June 2011 the applicant appealed against the dismissal of her
application for an interim order.
   38. On 15 June 2011 the SRC reassigned the case from ZWDC to the
SDC.
   39. It appears that on 18 July 2011 the SRC, following up on the
applicant’s appeal, quashed the decision of 6 June 2011 and remitted the case
for re-examination.
   40. On 19 September 2011 the applicant asked the SDC to expedite her
request for an interim order. She argued that since the initial decision had
been quashed, nothing had happened in her case. She also indicated that under
the appliable law, a request for an interim order should be decided within
seven days.
   41. On 14 October 2011 the applicant modified her original request for
contact rights.
   42. On 21 October 2011 the SDC issued an interim order, setting out the
applicant’s (and her mother’s) contact with B. away from P.’s house (two
weekends per month, every Wednesday and selected days during the 2011
Christmas and New Year holiday period).
   43. On 7 November 2011 the SDC issued a main decision, establishing
the applicant and her mother’s long-term contact arrangements with B. away
from the child’s place of residence (two weekends per month, every
Wednesday afternoon and night until Thursday morning, one week during
winter holidays, a month during the summer holidays, and on an alternating
basis, selected days during the Christmas and Easter holidays).
   44. On 22 February 2012 the SRC dismissed the father’s appeal against
that decision.




                                        6
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


   4. Applications for enforcement of contact rights
   45. On 27 January 2012 the applicant asked the SDC to enforce the final
ruling of 7 November 2011 (see paragraph 43 above) regarding her contact
rights.
   46. On 15 February 2012 the SDC declared that it lacked jurisdiction
ratione loci and referred the case to the ZWDC.
   47. On 24 February 2012 the applicant lodged an appeal, arguing that for
reasons of procedural economy, the case should stay with the SDC, where all
the other proceedings regarding the applicant’s family situation were
pending.
   48. On 6 April 2012 the applicant wrote to the President of the SRC asking
for assistance in the enforcement of her contact with B. by expediting the
proceedings in her case. She submitted that the father had been hindering her
contact rights and that, despite the court’s ruling setting out those rights, she
had not had any contact with her son since February 2012.
   49. On 16 April 2012 the SRC dismissed the applicant’s interlocutory
appeal against the ruling of 15 February 2012. The court observed that the
proceedings regarding contact rights would not be hampered given that the
two courts in question were at a short distance from one another and that a
copy of the case file from the other court could always be appended to the file
of the case regarding contact rights.
   50. On 8 May 2012, in reply to the applicant’s complaints about the
protraction of the various proceedings regarding her family situation, the
President of the SRC informed the applicant that on 7 May 2012, the case file
had been released by that court and that her application regarding the
enforcement of contact rights would now be examined by the ZWDC.
   51. The subsequent proceedings in respect of the applicant’s contact
rights are described in paragraphs 63-82 below.

 C. Enforcement of the ruling of 23 May 2012 on the child’s return to
    the applicant

   52. On 30 May 2012 the applicant applied to the ZWDC to formally order
the surrender of B., based on the SRC’s ruling of 23 May 2012 (see
paragraph 16 above).
   53. On 11 July 2012 the ZWDC issued an interim order obliging P. to
hand the child over to the applicant by 20 July 2012. P. refused to comply.
   54. On 23 July 2012 the ZWDC ordered a court-appointed guardian to
forcibly remove B. from his father’s home.
   55. On 26 July, 1 August and 17 August 2012 the guardian, assisted,
among others, by the police and a psychologist, made attempts to enforce the
order. The guardian did not retrieve B. owing to the child’s emotional reaction
against his return to the applicant – on two occasions – and on account of the
child’s absence on 1 August.




                                        7
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


   56. On 2 August 2012 the applicant again asked the President of the SRC
to intervene in her case. On 20 August 2012 the president declared the
applicant’s complaint unfounded, given that the guardians had made attempts
to enforce the ruling.
   57. On 10 September 2012 the Commissioner for the Rights of the Child
(Rzecznik Praw Dziecka, the “RPD”) intervened in the proceedings and asked
the ZWDC to stay the enforcement of the ruling of 23 May 2012, reasoning
that B. could have suffered trauma on account of the actions undertaken by
the guardians, psychologists and police officers during the attempts to enforce
the ruling in question. He also suggested that the forcible handover of a child
to a parent after long-term alienation needed to be handled more delicately.
   58. On 18 September 2012 the ZWDC granted the RPD’s request and
stayed the enforcement of the ruling of 23 May 2012 until both the applicant
and P. had completed family therapy and training on parental and
conflict-solving skills. No time-limit was set within which the parties had to
comply.
   59. On 1 October 2012 the applicant appealed against that ruling. She
argued that P. had shown blatant disregard for judicial authority and the whole
situation could have been avoided had he willingly complied with the final
and enforceable court order, or had the authorities conducted the forcible
return differently, taking into account that the child had been alienated from
her. She stressed that the child had not been crying or been otherwise
hysterical during the authorities’ attempt to remove him from P. In her
submissions, B. had merely refused to go with his mother, verbally expressing
a categorical “no”. She also stressed that it was P. and his family who had
inflamed the situation by screaming at and insulting her while she had been
calmy waiting on the sidelines. The applicant argued that the ruling against
which she was appealing was practically non-enforceable, in that the
enforcement was made conditional on the family therapy and parental skills
training, which P. had no intention of pursuing, especially since his refusal
could impede enforcement. For her part, the applicant explained she had
made various enquires with the local authorities and learned that no such
training or therapy sessions were available to her. She also submitted that she
was a fully trained child educator who was attending psychological therapy.
She also listed a series of classes and workshops which she had completed in
her professional capacity, essentially indicating that she had the necessary
skills to ensure B.’s well-being.
   60. On 20 December 2012 the SRC quashed the ruling of 18 September
2012 and remitted the case for re-examination. It instructed the first-instance
court, firstly, to establish whether the parents had sought to undergo the
therapy and training sessions that had been ordered and, secondly, to indicate
the time-limit within which the parties had to comply with the order.
   61. On 11 April 2013 the applicant completed a forty-hour training
session on parental skills.




                                       8
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


   62. The subsequent proceedings are described in paragraphs 85-98 below.

 D. Proceedings conducted after 23 May 2012

   1. Proceedings and developments regarding contact rights
    63. On 27 November 2012 the ZWDC, acting proprio motu, issued an
interim order concerning the applicant’s contact with B. It authorised the
applicant to meet with B. on eight occasions over two months, namely on two
Saturdays and two Sundays of the month between 12 p.m. and 2 p.m., without
P. being present. The first four meetings were to take place at P.’s house, the
remainder away from the father’s home. It also ordered a guardian to
supervise each meeting.
    64. On 13 December 2012 P. appealed against the interim decision, asking
that the meetings take place in his house under his and the guardian’s
supervision.
    65. On 15 January 2013 the applicant replied to P’s appeal.
    66. On 11 March 2013 the SRC partly granted P.’s appeal, ordering that
all the applicant’s meetings with B. would take place in P.’s house, without
him being present, but under the supervision of a court-appointed guardian.
    67. In a letter of 13 August 2013 sent to the President of the ZWDC, the
applicant submitted that, for a long time, she had not been able to enforce her
contact rights set out in the decision of 27 November 2012, because, despite
her repeated interventions, the guardian, who was supposed to supervise the
visits, had only been assigned to her on 12 June 2013. On 3 September 2013
the President of the ZWDC replied that she had not found any shortcomings
on the part of the court or the guardians. Various court documents submitted
to the case file demonstrate that a court-appointed guardian was remunerated
for her work between August and September 2013. It had not been specified
how many meetings had taken place in that period.
    68. On 12 September 2013 the applicant made a new interim application
for another set of meetings with her son. She also submitted that the previous
meetings had taken place, but that P. and his family had been watching and
effectively disturbing them.
    69. On 26 September 2013 the ZWDC set out new contact arrangements.
The applicant was allowed to meet with her son on two alternating Saturdays
and two alternating Sundays of the month between 12 p.m. and 2 p.m. All the
meetings were to be supervised by a guardian. The Saturday meetings were
to take place away from P.’s house. The Sunday meetings were to take place
at P.’s house, without P. or his family being present. Starting on 1 December
2013, the applicant was to spend time with B. alone, without the guardian.
    70. Both the applicant and P. appealed against that ruling.
    71. On 25 November 2013 the SRC quashed the decision of 26 September
2013. It held that allowing the applicant’s meetings away from P.’s house was
a premature step in that it could be traumatic for the child, who, despite the




                                       9
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


applicant’s love and efforts, was still distrustful towards her. The court
suggested that an expert report should be obtained in that regard.
    72. On 9 January 2014 the applicant asked the guardian to indicate the
dates of her meetings with B., in accordance with the decision on her contact
rights of 11 March 2013 (see paragraph 66 above).
    73. On 23 January 2014 the guardian responded that no such dates could
be determined, because the case file was with the SRC.
    74. Court documents in the case file show that a guardian supervised the
applicant’s meetings with B. on 22 February, 16 and 22 March, and 6 and
12 April 2014.
    75. On 2 December 2014, in a decision adopted in the main custody
proceedings (see paragraph 91 below), the ZWDC set out the following
contact arrangements: the applicant was to see B. on two alternating
Saturdays and two alternating Sundays every month. For the first three
months, the meetings were to take place between 12 p.m. and 2 p.m., at P.’s
house and without P. or his family being present. As from the fourth month,
the meetings were to take place between 2 p.m. and 4 p.m., away from P.’s
house, without P. or his family being present. In the first two months, the
meetings away from P.’s house were to take place in the presence of a
guardian. In the first three months, P. was to take B. to those meetings.
    76. In that decision, the domestic court observed that, based on the
guardian’s reports, interviews and several expert reports, including the one
dated 3 July 2014 (see paragraph 90 below) and further testimony, during the
initial visits conducted in P.’s house, the child, on the one hand, had started
opening up to the mother through play, but, on the other hand, had been
unwilling or reluctant to engage with her. B. had talked back to the applicant,
reluctantly accepted her gifts or left the room. As of 14 February 2014, B. had
first become aggressive towards the applicant, and then had started ignoring
her altogether. The applicant’s bond with B. was weak.
    77. In the court’s view, the situation could be remedied by gradually
moving the meetings out of P.’s house and by balancing out the roles of the
parents. It was important for P. to undergo parental training and to show his
approval of B.’s meetings with his mother, in particular, by taking him to
those meetings. The domestic court stressed that its decision was driven by
the child’s best interests; it aimed to carefully reestablish the bond between
the child and his mother and alleviate the negative impacts of the parental
conflict on the child. The court observed that the aims could have already
been achieved if the ZWDC’s decision of 27 November 2012, which had set
out similar contact arrangements (see paragraph 63 above), had not been
changed as a result of P.’s appeal (see paragraphs 64 and 66 above).
    78. As a result of the appeal lodged by the applicant, on 6 May 2015 the
SRC made, among others, the following changes to the applicant’s contact
arrangements with B. (see paragraphs 92 and 93 below). The applicant’s
meetings with B. were to take place away from P.’s house after two, instead




                                      10
                          L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


of three, months. After three – instead of four – months, the meetings were to
take place from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m. As from the fifth month, the meetings were
to be extended and would take place from 2 p.m. to 6 p.m.
   79. According to a medical certificate issued on 3 July 2015 by a
psychiatrist from a public hospital, the applicant had been treated for
depression and an adjustment disorder associated with a series of traumatic
experiences regarding her inability to be with her son, threats that she had
received and battery on the street of which she had been a victim. The
psychiatrist determined that the applicant had shown symptoms that were
typical for victims of psychological violence. She concluded that the
applicant would be unable to have contact with B. in P.’s house for fear of
being exposed to further threats and owing to the risk to her mental and
physical health.
   80. The applicant refused to exercise her contact rights at P.’s residence
and insisted on meeting with B. at another location. She ceased all contact
with B. and the child’s father. She paid the child support that had been
imposed on her by the SDC’s decision of 22 November 2016.
   81. On 28 June 2018 the applicant applied for contact rights to be
exercised two hours per week away from P.’s house. As established by the
domestic court (decision of 28 March 2019, see paragraph 98 below), the
applicant had declined P.’s offer to settle the case with the arrangement that
contact with the child would take place at P.’s house.
   82. As submitted by the Government, presumably in 2018, the applicant
had several meetings with the child at the Consultative Panel of Court
Experts. Ultimately, the mother-child bond was effectively severed
(see paragraph 97 below).

   2. Interim order regarding the child’s place of residence
   83. On 13 June 2013 the ZWDC, acting proprio motu, issued an interim
order and determined that B.’s temporary residence would be with his father.
The court held that such a solution would be the least harmful for B.
   84. On 19 August 2013 the SRC dismissed the applicant’s appeal against
that ruling.

   3. Proceedings regarding child custody and contact rights
   85. It appears that on 18 January 2013 the ZWDC declared that it did not
have jurisdiction, given that, on 23 May 2012 the applicant had been given
custody of the child (see paragraph 16 above). The case was therefore
transferred to the SDC.
   86. The case file was not immediately transferred to the SDC, because the
appeal regarding contact rights was being examined by the SRC, which gave
a ruling on 11 March 2013 (see paragraph 66 above). On an unspecified date
the case file was then transferred to the SDC.




                                      11
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


    87. On 5 May 2013 the SDC formally asked the SRC to transfer the case
back to the ZWDC, owing to the fact that the child had ultimately remained
with P. On 31 May 2013 the SRC granted that request.
    88. On 10 June 2013 the President of the SRC replied to the applicant’s
complaint about the delays, lodged on 23 May 2013 with the Minister of
Justice. The president found the applicant’s allegations unjustified given the
need to have the case file transferred between the courts at different levels of
jurisdiction and the case, as such, transferred between the courts of the child’s
changing place of residence.
    89. Following up on the SRC’s decision of 25 November 2013
(see paragraph 71 above), on 3 April 2014 the ZWDC ordered an expert
report to be drawn up regarding B.’s condition and his relationship with his
parents.
    90. On 3 July 2014 the RODK submitted its report based, among other
things, on the examination of all persons concerned conducted on 4 June
2014. The experts found that B. had a bond with both parents. That bond was
nevertheless distorted by the parental conflict, in particular, by P.’s strongly
deprecating attitude towards the child’s mother. Given his loyalty to P. and
to his paternal family, B. had a negative view of his mother and rejected her
from his life. B. perceived his father as the primary caregiver and had a very
strong bond with him and with the paternal family. The experts concluded
that removing the child from P.’s family environment could provoke B.’s
opposition to the applicant. They also concluded that it was in the child’s best
interests, in the long term, to have undisturbed access to a freely developed
relationship with both parents. To avoid B.’s total alienation from his mother,
P. would have to completely abandon his authoritarian and rigid exclusion of
the applicant from the child’s life. To mitigate the negative consequences of
the child’s past exposure to P.’s attitude, and to normalise his relationship
with the applicant, it would be necessary to set out broad contact rights for
the applicant at her place of residence, without third parties and with the
possibility of the child spending nights there. It was suggested that P. should
take the child to such meetings and encourage him to have a relationship with
his mother.
    91. On 2 December 2014 the ZWDC partly changed the ruling of the SRC
of 23 May 2012, granting parental custody to P. and assigning his address for
B.’s temporary residence (see paragraph 16 above). Relying on Article 97 of
the Family and Custody Code as the legal basis, the court gave its decision in
the same ruling as the one regarding the applicant’s contact rights
(see paragraph 75 above). In that context, the court observed that ensuring
mutual contact between a child and a non-custodial parent and changing or
setting out contact arrangements, surely fell under “important matters relating
to the child” within the meaning of that provision (see paragraph 100 below).
    92. On 21 January 2015 the applicant appealed against that ruling.




                                       12
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


    93. On 6 May 2015 the SRC changed the ruling in so far as it concerned
the applicant’s contact arrangements (see paragraph 78 above) and dismissed
the remainder of her appeal. In the latter context, the court held that after
spending four years under P.’s de facto custody, it would be against B.’s best
interests to restore custody to the applicant.
    94. According to a certificate issued on 23 October 2015 by a psychologist
in a private practice, P. had been undergoing therapy sessions to improve his
parental skills in response to his son’s needs. The sessions were also attended
by B. It was assessed that the father-son relationship was very good, and no
issues were flagged as to B.’s condition. That certificate was challenged by
the applicant before the ZWDC. She stressed that the psychologist in question
lacked the professional qualifications to conduct psychotherapy and that she
had not elaborated on her findings which greatly diverged from what had been
established by the RODK experts.
    95. On 29 December 2016 the ZWDC reinstated the father’s full parental
custody rights and lifted the guardian’s supervision (see paragraph 21 above).
The applicant, who had been notified about those proceedings, did not
participate.
    96. On 27 September 2018 court-appointed experts drew up the third
report regarding B. and his relationship with his mother, as ordered by the
SRC on 28 February 2018. The experts concluded that, while the bond
between the child and the mother had effectively been severed and B. did not
wish to spend any time with his mother, it would be better for B. if the mother
were allowed to be present in his life.
    97. On 25 March 2019 court-appointed experts drew up the fourth report
regarding B. and his relationship with his mother, as ordered by the ZWDC
on 7 November 2018. The experts concluded that, owing to B.’s negative
attitude towards his mother and his unwillingness to meet with her, it would
not be in his best interests to impose on him an obligation to meet with the
applicant, even if the meetings were to take place in P.’s house.
    98. On 28 March 2019 the ZWDC divested the applicant of custody of B.
That ruling was final.

RELEVANT LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND PRACTICE
I. DOMESTIC LAW

 Parental custody and contact rights

   99. Parental custody and contact rights are regulated by the Family and
Custody Code (Kodeks rodzinny i opiekuńczy, the “FCC”) and by the Code
of Civil Procedure (Kodeks Postępowania Cywilnego, the “CCP”), as
applicable at the material time.




                                      13
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


   1. Procedure
   100. In the context of parental custody, in the absence of agreement
between the parents, a court decides on “important matters relating to the
child” (Article 97 § 2 of the FCC). Regardless of who exercises parental
authority, the parents and their child have the right and obligation to maintain
contact with each other (Article 113 § 1 of the FCC). In the absence of an
agreement between the parents, the court will decide on how contact is to be
maintained with the child by the non-custodial parent (Article 1131 of the
FCC).
   101. An application for an interim order can be filed by a party to any civil
case (Article 730 of the CCP) that has demonstrated legal interest
(Article 7301 § 1 of the CCP). Legal interest in seeking an interim order exists
when the lack of such an order makes it impossible or seriously impedes the
execution of a judgment rendered in the main case or otherwise makes it
impossible or seriously difficult to achieve the purpose of the proceedings in
the main case (Article 7301 § 2 of the CCP). An application for an interim
order must be examined immediately and no later than one week from the
date of its receipt by the court (Article 737 of the CCP). If the law provides
for the application to be examined at a hearing, such a hearing is held within
one month from the date of receipt of the application (ibid.).
   102. A final court decision regarding custody or contact can be modified
at any time if the interests of the child so require. This can be done pursuant
to an application by either parent or by the court acting of its own motion
(Article 577 of the CCP and Articles 106 and 1135 of the FCC).
   103. Since 13 August 2011 a domestic court, at the request of the party,
must order the custodial parent to cease hindering the contact rights of the
non-custodial parent within a set time-limit, on pain of a fine or punitive
damages (Article 5821 § 3 and Articles 59815 to 59821 of the CCP). A court
decision on contact arrangements serves as an enforceable order for the
purposes of such a request.

   2. Supervision of parental custody and contact rights by guardians
   104. A court can subject the enforcement of parental custody to the
supervision of a guardian (Article 109 § 2.3 of the FCC). The court can also
subject the enforcement of contact rights between a non-custodial parent and
a child to the supervision of a guardian or another designated person
(Article 1132 § 2.3 of the FCC). Establishing supervision for meetings
between a parent and a child is intended to first bring about that meeting, and
then to arrange the relationship between the parents in such a way that those
meetings can take place without external interference and without the
presence of third parties. The task of guardians in this type of supervision can
be compared to the function of mediators. Their task is to bring the parties to
an agreement regarding contact and to regulate them in such a way that they




                                       14
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


can take place in a form similar to the natural state (see T. Jedynak and
K. Stasiak (eds), An outline of the guardian’s work methodology, Warsaw,
2013, section 3.1.1).
   105. When required by circumstances, the guardian has an obligation to
lodge applications seeking a change to or revocation of a measure ordered by
a court (section 11.1 of the Court-Appointed Guardians Act of 27 July 2001
(Ustawa o kuratorach sądowych), as in force at the material time).

   3. Mitigation of conflict between parents and mediation in childcare
      disputes
   106. A court can oblige the parents and the minor to undertake a specific
course of action, in particular, to work with a family assistant in order to
implement a work plan with the family, or refer the parents to a facility or
specialist dealing with family therapy, counselling or providing other
appropriate assistance to the family, while at the same time indicating the
method of monitoring the implementation of the orders issued (Article 109
§ 2.1 of the FCC). A similar regulation operates in the context of contact
rights (Article 1134 of the FCC).
   107. The FCC, as such, makes no provision for family mediation in
childcare cases (see Kacper Nowakowski v. Poland, no. 32407/13, § 87,
10 January 2017). However, pursuant to Article 5702 of the CCP, in all
matters in which a settlement is allowed under the law, a court may refer the
participants to mediation (Article 10 of the CCP). Such mediation may extend
to the subject of child custody or contact for a non-custodial parent with a
minor child (resolution of the Supreme Court of 21 October 2005, III CZP
75/05, OSNC 2006). Mediation is further regulated in Article 1831-15 of the
CCP.
   108. Pursuant to the submissions made by the Polish Government in the
framework of the execution of the Court’s judgment in Kacper Nowakowski
(cited above), extensive measures have been undertaken by the authorities to
ensure that mediation is widely used in family-law cases (Communications
from Poland DH-DD(2022)23, 5 January 2022, and DH-DD(2022)587,
31 May 2022). The number of cases regarding family matters settled through
in and out-of-court mediation has risen from 406, in 2012, to several thousand
per year as from 2017 (Communications from Poland DH-DD(2018)23,
12 January 2018 and DH-DD(2022)587, 31 May 2022).

II. INTERNATIONAL LAW

   109. Recommendation No. R (98) 1 of the Council of Europe’s
Committee of Ministers to member States on family mediation, adopted on
21 January 1998, recognised the growing number of family disputes,
particularly those resulting from separation or divorce. Noting the detrimental
consequences of conflict for families, the text recommended that the member




                                      15
                               L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


States introduce or promote family mediation or, where necessary, strengthen
existing family mediation. In accordance with paragraph 7 of the
Recommendation, the use of family mediation could “improve
communication between members of the family, reduce conflict between
parties in dispute, produce an amicable settlement, provide continuity of
personal contacts between parents and children, and lower the social and
economic costs of separation and divorce for the parties themselves and
States” (see also the European Commission for the Efficiency of Justice’s
Guidelines for a better implementation of the existing recommendation
concerning family mediation and mediation in civil matters (CEPEJ
(2007)14)).

THE LAW
I. ALLEGED VIOLATION OF ARTICLE 8 OF THE CONVENTION

   110. The applicant complained that the domestic authorities had not taken
all the necessary steps to ensure protection of her right to respect for her
family life as guaranteed in Article 8 of the Convention, which reads as
follows:
      “1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family life ...
      2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right
    except such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in
    the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the
    country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals,
    or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.”

 A. Admissibility

   111. The Court notes that the application is neither manifestly ill-founded
nor inadmissible on any other grounds listed in Article 35 of the Convention.
It must therefore be declared admissible.

 B. Merits

   1. The parties’ submissions
   112. The applicant complained that the authorities had been unable to
effectively enforce lawful decisions in her favour and that there had been a
series of long procedural delays in the proceedings regarding her family
situation. She also complained that the courts had ruled in favour of her
child’s father despite an expert’s recommendation that she should be the
custodial parent and despite being aware that the father had been hindering
her contact with the child.




                                             16
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


   113. The Government argued that the authorities had complied with their
positive obligations to secure to the applicant the effective exercise of her
right to respect for her family life. The Government stressed that the
authorities had been reacting to a complex family situation marked by a
strong conflict between the two parents and the child’s negative attitude
towards the applicant. They had ultimately acted in the child’s best interests.

   2. General principles
   114. The general principles concerning respect for family life, positive
obligations of the State and the importance of the interests of a child in
matters concerning childcare disputes were summarised in the cases of E.K.
v. Latvia (no. 25942/20, §§ 73-77, 13 April 2023), P.K. v. Poland
(no. 43123/10, §§ 81-86, 10 June 2014), and Malec v. Poland (no. 28623/12,
§§ 66-67, 28 June 2016).
   115. The Court reiterates that, in relation to the State’s obligation to take
positive measures, Article 8 encompasses a parent’s right to the taking of
measures with a view to his or her being reunited with the child and an
obligation on the national authorities to facilitate such reunion, in so far as
the interest of the child dictates that everything must be done to preserve
personal relations and, if and when appropriate, to “rebuild” the family; the
State’s obligation is not one of result, but one of means (see Krasicki
v. Poland, no. 17254/11, §§ 83 and 85, 15 April 2014, with further
references).
   116. Moreover, in proceedings concerning children it is important to take
into consideration that time takes on a particular significance, as there is
always a risk that any procedural delay will result in the de facto
determination of the issue before the court and that the decision‑making
procedure should provide the requisite protection of parental interests (ibid.,
§ 86, and T.C. v. Italy, no. 54032/18, § 58, 19 May 2022). The Court also
reiterates, however, that the obligation of expeditious examination of a
childcare case and the obligation to assess the merits of the case on the basis
of quality and sufficient evidence are equally important components of the
notion of diligence which the domestic courts should manifest in order to
comply with Article 8 of the Convention (see M.H. v. Poland, no. 73247/14,
§ 8, 1 December 2022).
   117. Lastly, the child’s best interests must be the primary consideration
and may, depending on their nature and seriousness, override those of the
parents (see Strand Lobben and Others v. Norway [GC], no. 37283/13, §§ 204
and 206, 10 September 2019, and Malec, cited above, § 67). In this context,
the Court considers that, in principle, it is in the child’s best interests to
maintain contact with both parents, in so far as practicable, on an equal
footing, save for lawful limitations justified by considerations relating to
those interests (see Kacper Nowakowski v. Poland, no. 32407/13, § 81,
10 January 2017).




                                       17
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


   3. Application of those principles in the present case
     (a) General observations
   118. It is not disputed that the present case concerns “family life” within
the meaning of Article 8 § 1 of the Convention and that this provision is
applicable.
   119. The decisive question is whether the Polish authorities took all the
necessary steps that could reasonably be required to ensure the enforcement
of the child’s return and of the applicant’s contact rights. The Court must
assess whether the domestic courts ruled on those issues in a timely and
adequate manner, and whether the authorities took all the necessary steps to
facilitate the enforcement of those rulings. Overall, the Court’s task is to
consider whether the measures taken by the Polish authorities were as
adequate and effective as could reasonably have been expected in the
circumstances to ensure the protection of the applicant’s right to respect for
her family life.
   120. The Court, having thoroughly analysed the sequence of the relevant
sets of proceedings and the measures taken by the authorities, would make
the following observations in respect of the relevant aspects of the case.

     (b) Observations regarding the return order and its enforcement
    121. Regarding the steps taken to facilitate the return of the child, the
Court will first assess the length of the decision-making process regarding
custody in the first-instance court. In this context, the Court notes that the
applicant initiated her action for custody and for the child’s return in March
2011 (see paragraph 7 above). The first-instance court quickly took up the
case (see paragraphs 8 and 10 above). It was, however, well over three
months into the proceedings, on 20 June 2011, that it ordered an expert report
in respect of the family (see paragraph 11 above). It took the experts four
months to draw up the report (see paragraph 12 above) and another four
months elapsed before the first-instance court issued, on 23 February 2012,
its ruling on custody. It is true that, between March and June 2011, the court
was not only conducting the main proceedings, but also dealing with various
interim applications regarding the child’s place of residence and the
applicant’s contact rights (see paragraphs 18, 21, 23, 27 and 34 above). In the
subsequent part of the main proceedings, however, the domestic court was
not called on to issue any interim orders (see paragraphs 17-27 above).
Overall, the fact remains that the first-instance custody ruling was issued as
many as eleven months after the father had refused to take the child back to
his mother (see paragraphs 6 and 13 above). The Government did not provide
any reasons for that delay.
    122. Concerning the adequacy of the first-instance ruling on custody, the
Court reiterates that it is not seeking to substitute itself for the domestic
authorities in the exercise of their responsibilities as regards parental




                                       18
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


authority, but rather to review under the Convention the decisions taken by
those authorities in the exercise of their margin of appreciation (see Kaleta
v. Poland, no. 11375/02, § 58, 16 December 2008). The Court cannot but take
note, however, of the fact that, as later observed by the appellate court, the
first-instance court had not given any specific reasons for not adhering to the
unequivocal expert recommendation and for granting custody to P. instead of
to the applicant (see paragraphs 13 and 16 above). Moreover, it does not
appear from the reasoning of that decision that the first-instance court gave
any consideration to a crucial element of any child custody case, namely the
assessment of which parent was more likely to foster the child’s relationship
with the non-custodial parent.
    123. The Court does not take issue with the appellate proceedings that
were completed within a little over one month, on 23 May 2012, with the
SRC reversing the ruling of the first-instance court, relying on the expert
report (see paragraphs 14 and 16 above).
    124. Overall, the Court considers that the protraction, caused by the
first-instance court, of the decision-making process leading up to the return
order was a contributing factor to the ultimate inability of the authorities to
facilitate the child’s return to the applicant.
    125. As to the enforcement of the return order, the Court notes that in spite
of both the substantiated allegations and the actual record of non-compliance
with court orders on the part of the child’s father (see paragraphs 6, 14, 29-32,
45 and 48 above), it was only on 23 July 2012, that is to say, almost two
months after the return decision, that the court ordered that the child be
forcibly removed by a court-appointed guardian (see paragraph 54 above).
The Government did not provide any reasons for that delay.
    126. On 26 July, 1 August and 17 August 2012 at least three attempts were
made to retrieve the child from the father’s house, with the assistance of the
police, several guardians and a psychologist (see paragraph 55 above). Two
of those attempts failed because the child was anxious and refused to leave
(ibid.). On 18 September 2012 the family court stayed the enforcement of the
return order, following the intervention of the Child Rights Commissioner
(see paragraphs 57 and 58 above).
    127. The Court does not question the authorities’ conclusion that the stay
of the enforcement was in the child’s best interests. The Court has repeatedly
held that coercive measures against children are not desirable in this sensitive
area, or might even be ruled out by the best interests of the child (see Malec,
cited above, § 77, with further references). The Court also held, however, that
the use of sanctions must not be ruled out in the event of unlawful behaviour
by the parent with whom the child lives (see A.S. and M.S. v. Italy,
no. 48618/22, § 153, 19 October 2023, and, mutatis mutandis, H.N. v. Poland,
no. 77710/01, § 74, 13 September 2005).
    128. In this context, the Court takes issue with the lack of foresight on the
part of the domestic court and the authorities, which had not taken sufficient




                                       19
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


preparatory steps, by means of mitigating the family conflict, with a view to
ensuring the smooth return of the child to the custodial parent, and
incidentally, the enforcement of the contact rights of the non-custodial parent.
In particular, the Court notes that the complexity of the family dispute, owing
to the alienation of the child from the non-custodial parent and the strong
conflict between the parties had been known to the authorities, given that the
proceedings regarding custody, temporary residence and contact rights had
been ongoing for over a year (see paragraphs 8-50 above) and that the
applicant had been informing the court and the guardian of the difficulties in
enforcing her contact rights (see paragraphs 28-32 above). Court-appointed
experts had also brought to the court’s attention their conclusion that the
child’s father was uncooperative and defiant of court orders and that both
parties’ parental skills had been diminished by the conflict between them
(see paragraph 12 above). Despite these elements, it was only on 23 February
2012 that the family court ordered the parents to undergo therapy and training
to improve their parental skills. This order was not only belated, but also
deprived of any force, owing to the court’s failure to indicate any time-limit
within which such an obligation was to be complied with (see paragraph 13
above). In this context, the Court notes that the domestic law offers a
possibility for domestic courts adjudicating childcare cases, to issue, proprio
motu and at any stage of the proceedings, specific orders for measures to
mitigate family conflict and protect the best interests of the child
(see paragraph 106 above). The Court has already observed in a similar case
concerning the enforcement of contact rights that civil mediation “would have
been desirable as a means of promoting cooperation between all parties to the
case” (see Cengiz Kılıç v. Turkey, no. 16192/06, § 132 in fine, 6 December
2011). Such opportunity was not effectively seized by the domestic courts in
the present case.

     (c) Observations regarding contact arrangements and their implementation
   129. Moving on to the assessment of the steps to facilitate the applicant’s
contact with her son, the Court notes that the applicant first applied for an
interim decision on contact rights in March or April 2011 (see paragraph 26
above). That application was dismissed on 26 April 2011 on the grounds that
the applicant had not demonstrated the legal interest in having her contact
rights regulated as part of the main custody proceedings (see paragraph 27
above). The domestic court thus declined to rule on the matter, having
concluded that the absence of the interim order sought would not render the
enforcement of the future decision on custody impossible or seriously
difficult to enforce (ibid.). The Court finds this conclusion undermined by the
following two elements of the case. Firstly, another domestic court that was
later adjudicating the applicant’s custody case found both merit and a legal
basis in ruling on contact rights as part of the main proceedings regarding
custody (see paragraphs 91 and 100 above). Secondly, the interruption of the




                                       20
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


mutual contact between B. and the applicant was indeed an important factor
that rendered the enforcement of the child’s return order of 23 May 2012
seriously difficult and, ultimately, impossible (see paragraphs 55, 58, 91 and
101 above). The Court finds that even without such hindsight, the domestic
court ought to have considered such a risk to exist by the mere nature of
childcare disputes between strongly antagonistic parties.
   130. On 5 May 2011 the applicant followed up with an application to have
her contact rights established in a separate set of proceedings
(see paragraph 33 above). The Court notes, however, that the accompanying
interim application was never examined on the merits. This resulted from the
fact that, despite the applicant’s request to have the proceedings expedited
(see paragraphs 35 and 40 above) and despite a clear statutory deadline
(see paragraph 101 above), the courts spent five months deciding, back and
forth, on jurisdiction (see paragraphs 33-40 above), only to ultimately see the
court with which the applicant had originally lodged an application rule on
contact rights in response to her – by then modified – interim application
(see paragraphs 41 and 42 above).
   131. The first (interim) ruling regarding the applicant’s contact rights was
therefore issued on 21 October 2011 (see paragraph 42 above). This means
that the applicant’s contact with her son was left unregulated for nearly six
months. The Court finds that, while procedural reasons may validly justify
some protraction, the seriously belated judicial intervention in the present
case cannot be justified given that the authorities knew or ought to have
known that B. was a very young child who had been abruptly removed by the
father from his habitual residence with the mother (see paragraphs 5 and 6
above) and that the proceedings in this matter were ongoing (see paragraph 8
above); that the child was becoming alienated from the mother, owing to the
disruption of the latter’s contact with the child (see paragraph 28 above); and
that a strong conflict between the parents (paragraph 8 above) was likely to
undermine any prospects of amicable contact arrangements.
   132. The Court also observes that, having set out the applicant’s contact
rights, firstly by means of an interim order and then by the main decision of
7 November 2011 (see paragraph 43 above), the domestic courts did not take
sufficient measures to facilitate the effective enforcement of those rights. In
particular, no action was taken in response to the applicant’s informing the
court and the court-appointed guardian that P. had been hindering her contact
rights (see paragraphs 29-32 above). Moreover, despite the applicant’s formal
application for the enforcement of her contact rights of 27 January 2012
(see paragraph 45 above) and her request for the expedition of those
proceedings (see paragraph 48 above), no judicial intervention took place for
over four months (see paragraph 49 above). That delay was again linked to
the issue of jurisdiction between the first-instance courts operating,
respectively, in the father or the mother’s district of residence
(see paragraphs 46-50 above). The applicant made the point, which has not




                                      21
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


been contested by the Government, that in the relevant period, more
specifically between 25 January and 9 April 2012, seventeen of her meetings
with her son did not take place because of the father’s actions (see
paragraphs 31 and 32 above).
   133. The Court would stress that the authorities’ effective inaction
vis-a-vis the father’s attitude was not in the child’s best interests
(see paragraph 117 above) and also had severe repercussions for the
applicant’s enjoyment of her right to respect for her family life. The hindering
of mutual contact between B. and the applicant by the child’s father was an
important factor that rendered the enforcement of the child’s return
impossible (see paragraph 129 above) and that subsequently caused a
complete break-down of the mother-child relationship (see paragraph 82
above).

     (d) Observations regarding the promptness of the decision-making process in
         respect of the return order and contact arrangements, and the adequacy of
         the measures after the stay of the enforcement of the return order
   134. Lastly, the Court will assess the promptness of the decision-making
process and the adequacy of the measures taken by the authorities after the
stay of the enforcement of the order to have the child returned to the applicant.
   135. Regarding the follow-up to the return order, the Court notes that on
18 September 2012 the ZWDC stayed the enforcement of that order until both
the applicant and P. had completed family therapy (see paragraph 58 above).
The Court observes that that ruling was practically non-enforceable, firstly,
because the domestic court had omitted to indicate a time-limit for the therapy
and secondly, because P. had a record of blatant non-compliance with court
orders (see paragraph 59 above).
   136. More importantly still, while on 20 December 2012 the SRC quashed
that ruling, flagging the above-mentioned error in issuing an open-ended
order regarding parental therapy, it did not rectify it (see paragraph 60 above).
Moreover, while the applicant subsequently completed her training sessions
(see paragraph 61 above), the fact that P. did not was not met with any
reaction from the domestic courts (see paragraph 77 above). As a result, some
doubt arises as to whether the authorities were, at that point, aiming to enforce
the child’s return order, which was no longer formally stayed, and whether
they were seeking the rectification of the father’s action that they had
themselves deemed wrongful and against the child’s best interests. The Court
accepts that the authorities must react to the inherently dynamic family
situation with the overarching goal of protecting the child’s best interests,
including short-term interests. It is not acceptable, however, for the domestic
authorities to lose sight of the main purpose, which, in the present case and at
that time, was to reestablish the mutual relationship between the child and his
mother. Instead, the courts merely reacted in a haphazard and protracted
manner to various issues arising, one after another, in the case.




                                       22
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


    137. The Court therefore notes that the domestic courts ruled on the issue
of the applicant’s contact rights. The first set of contact arrangements was
established in the interim decisions issued on 27 November 2012 by the
first-instance court, and on 11 March 2013 by the appellate court
(see paragraphs 63 and 66 above). Based on those decisions, the applicant’s
meetings with B. were to be supervised by a court-appointed guardian (ibid.).
As submitted by the applicant, and not contested by the Government, the
meetings did not take place for seven months because, despite the applicant’s
intervention, the guardian was only assigned on 12 June 2013 (see
paragraph 67 above). The second set of contact arrangements was briefly
established in the interim decision issued by the first-instance court on
26 September 2013 and quashed by the appellate court on 25 November 2013
(see paragraphs 69 and 71 above). The material in the case file shows that the
applicant’s contact with her child was again effectively interrupted until
22 February 2014 for reasons relating to the shortcomings of the guardian
supervision arrangement (see paragraphs 72-74 above). The
above-mentioned lack of effective enforcement of the courts’ rulings
regarding contact rights renders it unnecessary for the Court to additionally
examine the adequacy of those rulings.
    138. The applicant’s long-term contact arrangements were ultimately set
out in the ZWDC’s decision of 2 December 2014, as amended by the SRC on
6 May 2015 (see paragraphs 75 and 78 above). The Court observes that those
decisions were issued in the framework of the main custody proceedings and
had taken into account the RODK’s expert report ordered on 3 April 2014
and drawn up three months later (see paragraphs 89, 90, 91 and 93 above).
The Court finds that those contact arrangements adequately protected the
child’s best interests and the applicant’s right to respect for family life. In
particular, the meetings between the mother and the child, who had by that
time become very alienated, were to start in the child’s house and to gradually
move to another location. The meetings were to be supervised by a guardian.
It was recommended that the child’s father should undergo parental training
sessions, although no formal order with a time-limit was issued in that
respect. Lastly, P. was ordered to show his support for the child’s contact with
his mother by taking B. to the meetings in the later phase
(see paragraphs 75-78 and 90 above). The Court finds it regrettable that such
well-tailored and forward-looking contact arrangements were made so late in
the decision-making process. In this context, the Court firstly notes the
ZWDC’s criticism of the appellate court’s earlier decision confining the
child-and-mother meetings to the father’s house (see paragraphs 77 in fine,
and 66 above). Secondly, the Court notes that the applicant had by that time
developed depression and was unable to benefit from those arrangements
(see 79 and 80 above).
    139. Overall, the Court finds that the measures taken by the domestic
courts and the guardians were not adequate, timely or sufficient in the




                                       23
                            L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


circumstances of the case (contrast, mutatis mutandis, Krasicki, cited above,
§§ 92-100).

     (e) Observations regarding the final ruling on custody
    140. The Court also observes that the ruling granting custody of B. to the
applicant was ultimately reversed by the ZWDC on 2 December 2014, that is
to say, two years after the appellate court had remitted the case for
re-examination (see paragraphs 60 and 91 above). The Court finds such a
delay unacceptable, even considering that the court had to issue, in that time,
three interim decisions (see paragraphs 63, 69 and 83 above) or that it had to
wait for the case file to be returned from another jurisdiction
(see paragraph 85 above). In this context, the Court would stress that the
delays that marked the custody and related proceedings were largely caused
by the practice of transferring a material case file between different courts
that were called on to adjudicate on specific issues comprising the family
dispute. The Court therefore considers that two general problems contributed
to the shortcomings in the present case. It is firstly, the lack of recourse,
throughout the entire set of proceedings, to hard copies or indeed, digital
solutions that were otherwise possible (see paragraph 49 above). Secondly, it
is the fragmentation of the childcare case into separate sets of proceedings
regarding issues such as contact rights or the child’s place of residence, and
the assignment of these side-proceedings to a jurisdiction distinct from that
conducting the main custody proceedings. In the Court’s view, adjudicating
a childcare case holistically in all its aspects – as was eventually the case in
the present circumstances (see paragraphs 63-98 above) – may prevent the
unnecessary protraction of a decision-making process which is often fatal to
the right to respect for family life of a non-custodial parent. It is not for the
Court, however, to assess in the instant case whether the existing instruments
would have been sufficient or whether they should have been supplemented
by means of legislative reform.
    141. Lastly, the Court observes that, in the light of how the impugned
proceedings developed, nothing in the case material allows it to question the
domestic courts’ decisions of 2 December 2014 and 6 May 2015 to ultimately
grant the child’s custody to the father, or the decision of 28 March 2019 to
divest the applicant of her parental rights (see paragraphs 91-98 above).

     (f) Conclusions
    142. In sum, the Court acknowledges that difficulties in protecting the
applicant’s right to respect for her family life were in large measure on
account of the animosity between the applicant and the child’s father, the
latter’s actions with respect to the child and his non-compliance or partial
compliance with court orders. The Court is mindful of the fact that child
custody disputes by their very nature are extremely sensitive for all the parties




                                        24
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


concerned, and it is not necessarily an easy task for the domestic authorities
to ensure execution of a court judgment in such a dispute where one or both
parents’ behaviour is far from constructive (see, mutatis mutandis, P.K.
v. Poland, cited above, § 88).
   143. That said, a lack of cooperation between parents who have separated
is not a circumstance which can of itself exempt the authorities from their
positive obligations under Article 8; it rather imposes on the authorities an
obligation to take measures that would reconcile the conflicting interests of
the parties, keeping in mind the paramount interests of the child (see Z.
v. Poland, no. 34694/06, § 75, 20 April 2010).
   144. In the present case the conflict between the applicant and the child’s
father made it particularly difficult for the domestic authorities to ensure the
full enforcement of the applicant’s custody and contact rights. This does not
change the fact, however, that the domestic authorities had an obligation to
ensure the effective enforcement of the child’s return and subsequently, the
contact arrangements, since it is they who exercise public authority and have
the means at their disposal to overcome problems obstructing execution
(see, mutatis mutandis, P.K. v. Poland, cited above, § 89; and Kacper
Nowakowski, cited above, § 82).
   145. Owing to the fact that the child’s unrestricted day-to-day contact
with his mother was abruptly curtailed by the father’s actions and restricted
to taking place at the latter’s house for only several hours per week, it was
incumbent on the domestic authorities to deal with the case speedily
(see, mutatis mutandis, J.N. v. Poland, no. 10390/15, § 136, 10 November
2022).
   146. Although it cannot be said that the authorities were idle in the
performance of their duties, the proceedings were marked by a lack of
diligence as well as long and repeated delays that had significant
consequences for the family situation. The shortcomings in the
decision-making process and in the enforcement of the courts’ orders have,
ultimately, contributed to the complete breakdown of the applicant’s
relationship with her son.
   147. Having regard to the facts of the case, in particular the passage of
time, and the criteria laid down in its own case-law, the Court concludes that,
notwithstanding the State’s margin of appreciation, the Polish authorities
failed to make adequate and effective efforts to protect the applicant’s right
to respect for her family life.
   148. There has accordingly been a violation of Article 8 of the
Convention.

II. APPLICATION OF ARTICLE 41 OF THE CONVENTION

   149. Article 41 of the Convention provides:




                                       25
                                L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


      “If the Court finds that there has been a violation of the Convention or the Protocols
    thereto, and if the internal law of the High Contracting Party concerned allows only
    partial reparation to be made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just satisfaction to the
    injured party.”

 A. Damage

   150. The applicant claimed 20,000 euros (EUR) in respect of
non-pecuniary damage.
   151. The Government argued that the claim in respect of non-pecuniary
damage should be dismissed as irrelevant, unsubstantiated and unreasonably
high.
   152. The Court accepts that the applicant must have suffered distress and
emotional hardship as a result of the Polish authorities’ failure to ensure the
enforcement of the child’s return and to conduct expeditious proceedings
regarding custody and contact rights, a failure which is not sufficiently
compensated for by the finding of a violation of the Convention. Having
regard to the sums awarded in comparable cases, and making an assessment
on an equitable basis, the Court awards the applicant EUR 10,000 in respect
of non-pecuniary damage.

 B. Costs and expenses

   153. The applicant also claimed EUR 2,469 in respect of costs and
expenses, including EUR 1,570 incurred in the proceedings before the Court,
and EUR 899 incurred in the domestic proceedings. Receipts and invoices
were submitted in respect of both of these amounts.
   154. The Government did not comment on the costs claimed in respect of
the domestic proceedings. They argued that the amount of the costs claimed
in respect of the proceedings before the Court was excessive.
   155. According to the Court’s case-law, an applicant is entitled to the
reimbursement of costs and expenses only in so far as it has been shown that
these were actually and necessarily incurred and are reasonable as to
quantum. In the present case, regard being had to the documents in its
possession and the above criteria, the Court considers it reasonable to award
EUR 2,469 covering costs under all heads, plus any tax that may be
chargeable to the applicant.

FOR THESE REASONS, THE COURT, UNANIMOUSLY,

1. Declares the application admissible;

2. Holds that there has been a violation of Article 8 of the Convention;




                                              26
                           L.D. v. POLAND JUDGMENT


3. Holds
   (a) that the respondent State is to pay the applicant, within three months
       from the date on which the judgment becomes final in accordance with
       Article 44 § 2 of the Convention, the following amounts, to be
       converted into the currency of the respondent State at the rate
       applicable at the date of settlement:
       (i) EUR 10,000 (ten thousand euros), plus any tax that may be
            chargeable, in respect of non-pecuniary damage;
       (ii) EUR 2,469 (two thousand four hundred and sixty-nine euros) plus
            any tax that may be chargeable to the applicant, in respect of costs
            and expenses;
   (b) that from the expiry of the above-mentioned three months until
       settlement simple interest shall be payable on the above amounts at a
       rate equal to the marginal lending rate of the European Central Bank
       during the default period plus three percentage points;

4. Dismisses the remainder of the applicant’s claim for just satisfaction.

  Done in English, and notified in writing on 13 February 2025, pursuant to
Rule 77 §§ 2 and 3 of the Rules of Court.




        Ilse Freiwirth                                     Ivana Jelić
           Registrar                                        President




                                       27
